Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson. And David Crews. Few characters in either science fiction
or fantasy have been as fascinating to readers as Conan the Barbarian. Conan is
the creation of Robert E. Howard, a writer of the 1930s who lived in Cross
Plains, Texas. Howard filled the pulp magazines of his day with westerns,
detective stories, horror stories, science fantasy, just about anything that
would sell. But he became best known for his tales of heroic fantasy,
particularly the ones that involved Conan. Conan was a giant barbarian who lived
a swashbuckling life in the mythical Hyborian age that Howard created. There is
nothing fancy or subtle about Conan. He survives and flourishes by pure muscle
and swordplay. Howard's writing was colorful and exciting and perfectly matched
his hero.
Howard committed suicide in 1936 at the age of 30. He left a number of
unfinished Conan manuscripts and story ideas. And the character of Conan was so
appealing to readers that authors have recently been writing new material on him
or finishing Howard's own incomplete stories. Noted science fiction and fantasy
author L. Sprague de Camp has written Conan stories and become interested enough
in Howard's life to write a biography of him. We asked de Camp if Howard was
anything like Conan. Well, everybody knows that Conan is an idealization of
Howard. In other words, the kind of person that Howard thought he would have
liked to have been the ruthless, domineering, footloose, irresponsible
adventurer. Actually, Robert was no respecter of laws and regulations. But the
key word here is idealization. De Camp says Howard and Conan were nothing alike.
Actually, Robert was just the opposite type. Except for hot tempers and
chivalrous attitude toward women, they had nothing in common. Robert Howard was
shy, bookish, compassionate, extremely polite,
and socially timid, and so law-abiding that he wouldn't cut across the
neighbor's lot even, although everybody else across the lanes did. He was just
about as different from the character Conan in the stories as a person could be.
De Camp believes Howard yearned to live in a past age, some more heroic time
than the present. Well, Robert was always talking a lot about how he wished that
he thought he'd have been, really in his element, if he'd been born on the Texan
frontier in the 19th century, or in some barbarian society like the ancient
Gauls or Goths or somebody. Well, I don't, I think he'd have had a very
unpleasant surprise. Because it wasn't, it wasn't his temperament at all. He was
a, he was a shy, bookish introvert. Finally, De Camp reveals that Howard had a
serious mental problem. He had an outsized monkey on his back, and he was, he
was doomed from some way back. He planned his suicide ever since he was a little
boy. He told his mother when he was a little kid even, Mama, when you
die, I want to die with you. And the foolish woman, I think, probably sort of
giggled and encouraged him. It was long planned, and several people knew about
it. But they didn't do anything. The only thing you could have done with Robert
was, if you'd gotten him to a good shrink early enough, quite a good many years
before he actually killed himself, why, something might have been done. But
that, of course, is uncertain. Howard wrote some 21 Conan stories, most of which
appeared in Weird Tales in the 1930s. Only one novel, Conan the Conqueror, was
published, and that was some time after Howard's death. More next time about
Robert E. Howard.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Crews and David Carson. There are subcategories coming under the
general headings of science fiction and fantasy. One of the most popular these
days is heroic fantasy. It's sometimes called sword and sorcery, a term that
almost serves as a definition for the genre. It deals with heroic barbarians
swinging large bloody swords and sorcerers conjuring up all manner of demons.
And as we've said, it's popular nowadays, particularly the Conan stories of
Robert E. Howard. We asked an authority on heroic fantasy, L. Sprague de Camp, to
tell us why the form is so fascinating to readers. I think that part of the
popularity of the genre was a reaction to certain trends in fiction following
the Second World War, such as the fondness for heavily subjective psychological
or psychiatric stories,
very sentimental stories, stories glorifying the little man, the anti-hero, that
hopeless little jerk who can't do anything right and who has no brains or brawn
or character and whose only function is to suffer and suffer. Well, I think
people got sort of tired of that after a while. So they then, between the
paperback publication of the Conan stories, for which I can claim the credit,
I'm the one who sold them, and the paperback publication of Tolkien's Lord of
the Rings, which was the other major factor in launching this boom, why that got
people to reading heroic fantasy on a large scale, which they are still doing.
De Camp has written his own sword and sorcery, but he's also worked on the Conan
material of Robert E. Howard. He tells us how he was introduced to Howard's
stories of Conan. ...York in, uh, it was around the end of 1950, and, uh, let me
see, I think it was, uh, I think it was a naval war game at Pratt's apartment or
something. No, it wasn't. It was a party at Pratt's apartment. And, uh, he
handed me a copy of Conan the Conqueror, found in hardback, published by Gnome
Press. And he said, here, take this along. I think you might find it
interesting. I don't care much for it myself, but who knows? So I took it. It
seems that, uh, Martin had, um, by inadvertence sent, uh, Fletcher two review
copies, and Fletcher gave me one. So I started reading it on the train going
home and was hooked right away. Kept on until I'd read the thing through, and
then I read it through again. Howard died in the 1930s, but De Camp became so
involved with the character of Conan that he started to edit some of Howard's
papers and to write his own Conan stories. And then a year later, I found some,
I learned about some unpublished Conan manuscripts in the custody of, uh, the
agent for the Howard Literary Estate. And, uh, I read them, and arrangements
were made with the Howard Ayers and, uh, the agent for me to edit them for
public, and arrange for publication, and on, things have, uh, things have gone
on, uh, on and on, and build up from that.
De Camp has written original Conan material, but he's also finished incomplete
Howard stories and edited others. De Camp is also technical advisor to a movie
on Conan that will premiere this week. It's entitled Conan the Barbarian, and it
will show you what heroic fantasy is all about. More about Robert E. Howard next
time.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson. And David Crews. Robert E. Howard, the creator of Conan the
Barbarian, was a paradox. He was brought up on the arid plains of west central
Texas, lived in the small country town of Cross Plains, and hardly did any
traveling, and he died by his own hand at the age of 30. Yet Howard wrote heroic
stories that were set in the mythical age after the fall of Atlantis. He was
fascinated with the misty, cold northern landscape in which he set his tales.
Conan, his greatest creation, was a barbarian from the north, a giant who strode
across the Hyborian age wielding a bloody broadsword. But Howard's life was a
quiet one. He was introverted, bookish, and shy. As far as we know, he was never
in a brawl or fight of any kind. Why did Howard create Conan and place him in a
mythical northern landscape? What sort of mind would conceive of a barbarian
hero, a loner who spurned civilization? We spoke with Dr. Charlotte Laughlin, a
professor at Howard Payne University in Brownwood, Texas, not far from Howard's
home in Cross Plains. Dr. Laughlin is intimate with Howard's life and has done
research for her Howard biography. She believes there are some reasons for
Howard's obsession with Conan. I think that, again, it was a sort of explanation
for why he did not fit in with other people. He liked to believe, I am the last
barbarian. It's because, and my type will prevail. He liked to believe that the
other people had a veneer of civilization on them that got them away from the
basics that were really important. And if you've read his correspondence with
Lovecraft, they had long arguments about the physical versus the intellectual
needs of a society. And Howard would say that in the tough country where he
lived, you had to be physically fit. And he spent a great deal of his life, his
adult life, trying to be physically fit, boxing and working out and that sort of
thing.
Howard also was fascinated with the legendary past of Britain, especially with
the savage Picts and the early heroes of Celtic myth. Some of his Conan stories,
such as Across the Dark River, have ancient Britain as their setting. We asked
Dr. Laughlin why Howard was so drawn to this material. He claimed that he was
full-blood Irish and they were the Irish kings like some other people we know
claim to be. But there's no evidence that he certainly was not full-blood Irish.
People have traced his genealogy. But this was part of his image of himself. He
was trying to project other people and trying to create for himself. There
again, he wrote at one time that he wrote about the barren, cold, windswept,
damp areas even though he lived here. I think that again might be a sort of wish
fulfillment. Who wouldn't like to be someplace where it's cold on a day like
this? He wanted to be away from where he was because I don't think we can
underestimate the anger and frustration that was boiling around in Robert Howard
all the time. I see it in all of his poetry and a great deal of his fiction.
Cross Plains neighbors say that he had a, there was a big tree stump out by his
yard and I believe it was a sledgehammer not an axe. And sometimes in the middle
of the day he would go out there, you know, and you could just see that he was
so tense and he would take that sledgehammer and he would just wham it and wham
it and wham it on this tree stump. That a tremendous amount of anger he didn't
fit in with other people. He wanted to be somewhere else so he wrote about
something that was like nothing he had experienced.
Howard wrote reams of fantasy in the pulp era of the 1930s, most of it for Weird
Tales. We asked Dr. Laughlin why Howard wrote fantasy. Did he have the talent to
write more realistic fiction that might have gotten him out of the pulp ghetto?
He may have had the talent but I certainly don't believe he was capable of
writing realistic fiction. He was not that closely tied to reality himself. I
don't believe he ever could have written realistic novels. He had to write
fantasies of some sort. More about Robert E. Howard next time.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Crews.
And David Carson.
Fantasy writer Robert E. Howard grew up in the 1920s and the 1930s in the small Texas town of Cross Plains.
But he wasn't like other small town boys. He kept to himself quite a bit.
He read a lot and used a vivid imagination to create his memorable heroic fantasies, for most of which are the stories of Conan the Barbarian.
Howard died in 1936, but some of the people in Cross Plains still remember him clearly.
We spoke with two of Howard's friends, Jack Scott, the editor of the Cross Plains newspaper, and Leroy Butler, Howard's next door neighbor.
Butler remembers a time when he and Howard were still children and they bought some swords from a mail order company in New York.
But we ordered those things and we'd get out in the backyard and wrap a band down a hamster around our hedge-like pirate.
And we'd get out fence with those things.
Of course we didn't dare, you know, hit each other with them because they were, they'd have gone through you.
But we did that quite a bit. We had an immense live oak tree in our backyard and we'd get out there and shade that oak tree in.
Pretend that we were back maybe in the dark ages or something or in the time of the Spanish man.
Things like that. He had things like that on his mind all the time.
Butler says that Robert was a loner dedicated to his writing.
Robert never married. He never seemed interested in girls.
And he did have one girlfriend there in Cross Plains for a time. I'd see him out in the car driving around once in a while.
But I don't think that lasted long.
He was just wrapped up in his, in his work writing those stories.
And he had a blast-in-back porch on the southeast side of the house there.
And it wasn't too far from my mother's bedroom.
And a lot of times at night he'd wake her up with that typewriter clock in, you know, at 1 or 2 o'clock in the morning.
Some inspiration. He'd probably be laying there in bed and think of something and he'd get up and write it down right quick.
And he just worked all hours.
Jack Scott also comments on Howard's unusual personality. Howard was a little on
the odd side. He wasn't intimate with very many people. He was rather aloof. But
he was a big, robust man. To me, he was a combination of Edgar Allen Poe and
Jack London, if you can imagine that two together. In 1936, when Howard's mother
was dying of a terminal illness, Howard took his own life. I remember the
morning he killed himself very well. I heard on the street that Robert Howard
had just shot himself. I immediately jumped in my car and ran down there and got
down there. A few neighbors had gathered. It wasn't generally known over the
town, but the old justice of the peace was standing there on the gallery, the
front porch. When I walked up, he called me and said, Come here, Jack. And I
stepped up there and he took me into the bedroom. And he pointed to an old
Underwood typewriter. It had four lines written on it there. And Howard had,
when he had been told that his mother wouldn't live throughout the day, he went
to this typewriter, wrote these four lines, walked outside, sat down in his car
and shot his head off. And this old JP asked me what these four lines meant.
They said, I'm sure you've read them. All fled, all done, so lift me on the pyre.
The feast is over. The lamps expire. More about Robert E. Howard next time.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson. And David Crews. Will Conan the Barbarian ever die, or will
he go on forever? A large portion of the fantasy section of bookstores these
days is filled with books about Conan, the heroic barbarian created by the late
Robert E. Howard. Howard devised a mythical era for his hero and called it the
Hyborian Age. The period falls somewhere between the fall of Atlantis and the
beginnings of recorded history. Conan is a giant barbarian from Cimmeria, a
region to the north of the more civilized Hyborian kingdoms. With his huge
sword, he is an irresistible force that no man can stand up to. Howard wrote
some 21 Conan stories in the 1930s, most published in the pulp magazine Weird
Tales. They trace the life of the barbarian from his teenage years to his later
maturity when he became a king. The tales are full of lusty, bloody adventure,
pure escape fantasy that appeals to man's primal instincts. Conan battles
warriors, sorcerers, and monsters of all shapes. He's a thief, a soldier, a
swashbuckling pirate, and a king. The Conan stories are so popular that a number
of publishing houses have been putting them out. And a number of different
authors have been writing Conan stories. Howard left many gaps in the life of
Conan, and various contemporary writers have been filling those gaps with
original stories. L. Sprague de Camp was the first author to do that. These
stories done by other writers are called pastiches, and established writers such
as de Camp, Andrew J. Offutt, Poul Anderson, Lin Carter, and Bjorn Nyberg have
done them. We went to Robert E. Howard's home territory, the Brownwood Cross
Plains area of west central Texas, to speak with Dr. Charlotte Laughlin and Dr.
William Kreider. Dr. Laughlin has done research for a biography of Howard, and
Dr. Kreider teaches science fiction and fantasy at Howard Payne University. Dr.
Kreider explains what a pastiche is. Well, in the sense that we've been talking
about it, it's where one writer takes a character and a world, like the Hyborian
age created by another writer, and writes new stories with the same character in
the same setting. And he gets the full credit for the story, but the other
writer has created the character and the historical setting. Also, de Camp did
something similar, where he took incomplete Howard stories and changed them into
Conan stories, which would be a pastiche of a slightly different kind, but it's
the same principle operating.
The biography of Howard, entitled Dark Valley Destiny, has been written by A.
Sprague de Camp and his wife Catherine, and will probably be out sometime in the
next year. The book will mainly be a psychological study of Howard, which
attempts to explain why he wrote the kind of material he did. Conan has been so
popular that a major movie about him, entitled Conan the Barbarian, is
premiering this week across the country. It was filmed in Spain by director John
Milius and produced by De Laurentiis, and has muscle man Arnold
Schwarzenegger playing Conan. Early reports indicate that it does a marvelous
job of conveying the atmosphere of sword and sorcery essential to a Conan
adventure. Loughlin and Kreider talk about the movie and about Conan's
popularity. If this is a huge success, like Star Wars, let's say, that could
give even more emphasis to this kind of thing, and we may see Howard going on
forever with these pastiches being done by... I think it's possible that they
would be continued, because the original idea was to fill out Conan's life, you
know, have his life completely covered by the pastiches from, I don't know if he
went to his boyhood, but certainly all of his adult life when he was an old King
Conan. And it's already gone beyond that. They filled out his life, and then
they're going back to, you know, this stage in his life. He did such and such.
So certainly they're not going to stop with what would be the chronological life
of Conan. So the potential to go on beyond is there. The potential to keep Conan
alive and adventuring is definitely there. We should be hearing a lot more from
Conan.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.